-- Summary

The assigned text contains the message from Leilani Farha, Special Rapporteur on the right to adequate housing of the United Nations, who addresses to the members of the Human Rights Council.

Ms. Farha summarises several general points concerning housing affairs worldwide and, additionally, she reports insights and recommendations related to her visits to India and Portugal.

As far as the global situation is concerned, Ms. Farha warns of an alarming financialization of housing. Real estate represents already the 60% of all global assets as many metropolitan cities have allowed foreign investors to acquire houses as mere financial assets; as a consequence, housing prices have increased more than the incomes of the local residents in numerous places. That leads to relocations and community dismembering, to increased wealth and right inequality, and, in many situations, to foreclosures and evictions.

Although some restrictions and taxations are being already applied, Ms. Farha urges states to strongly commit to the New Urban Agenda, which has the goal of homelessness eradication by 2030; she exhorts them to shift the policies and regulations around housing towards a more humane paradigm in which houses represent their original meaning, a living space, and a human right that cannot be abolished by avoidable evictions.

Concerning the state visits, Ms. Farha describes two very distinct countries that nonetheless have fundamental challenges related to housing affairs: India and Portugal. On one hand, India has a growing population of 1.3 billion citizens and sixty million households in it lack of adequate water, electricity and sanitation conditions. Along these lines, Ms. Farha recommends a national moratorium on forced evictions and the recognition and in-situ rehabilitation of informal slums.

On the other hand, Ms. Farha describes Portugal as one of the most unequal countries in Europe. She reports the exclusion that African descents and the general housing unaffordability, among others, due to touristification (particularly in Lisbon and Porto).

-- Commentary

Real estate as a mere investment vehicle, and especially a globalised real estate market in which foreign investors can freely acquire houses, can lead to many social problems. More so in our inter-connected and quickly evolving society. Unfortunately, unforeseen paths and activities might emerge from apparently positive new technologies, which end up negatively affecting many citizens due to outdated regulations that do not protect them from those unforeseen activities.

A clear example are social media platforms and their large scale effects in how we interact as humans. And the particular case for housing is the platform Airbnb. Airbnb is undoubtedly a great technological innovation: I rent my spare room to occasional guests that visit my city due to professional and private reasons. Airbnb was one of the major triggerers of the shared-economy and created an apparently win-win scenario. However, in many touristic cities in Spain the wealthiest home-owners monetised their unused real estates assets and rented them exclusively in the summer season; as a consequence, the offer of regular rents decreased, which lead to the increment of the monthly fees for the regular tenants. On top of that, that regulation loophole represented only advantages for the wealthiest: they had full access to their apartments, no contracts were needed, the places were only half of the year occupied and used, and probably more money than with regular rents was earned.

Airbnb is not inherently bad. In fact, we desperately need such innovations as Airbnb to propel our prosperity, and in a related manner, real estate is a positive and useful mean to storing value for many investors. On the other hand, regulations clearly protect us all, but they have always been slower than technological innovations. Regulations could be understood as the delayed reaction to damaging imbalances caused by novel ways of organising our activities. And perhaps there we have part of the key: we need to embed in the technological innovations the seed for the regulation to reduce that delay.

Several financial innovations and regulations have appeared in the field of real state, such as insurance or strict mortgage lending requirements to prevent damaging situations; some of them were and are still controversial. As it is done in many engineering fields, we could require a thorough risk analysis to every new technology and business which might have large scale impacts on fundamental rights such as housing. That additional burden would be strongly debated, but it would be in line with the stress tests required to companies and financial institutions after the 2007/8 crisis. Reflecting on the possible risks and their mitigations could make the regulator and the society aware of negative impacts and solutions.